// gentilicis de les Illes Balears

arianyer arianyera
margalidà margalidana
artanenc artanenca
petrer petrera
colonier coloniera
gabellí gabellina
cerverí cerverina
llorencí llorencina
manacorí manacorina
manacorer manacorera
carrioner carrionera
felanitxer felanitxera
santanyiner santanyinera
saliner salinera
campaner campanera
llucmajorer llucmajorera
porrerenc porrerenca
algaidí algaidina
montuïrenc montuïrenca
vilafranquer vilafranquera
santjoaner santjoanera
sinever sinevera
mariando marianda
marier mariera
costitxer costitxera
llubiner llubinera
murer murera
llorità lloritana
pobler poblera
alcudienc alcudienca
pollencí pollencina
campaneter campanetera
llosetí llosetina
inquer inquera
binissalemer binissalemera
mancorí mancorina
alaroner alaronera
solleric sollerica
bunyolí bunyolina
selvatgí selvatgina
portolà portolana
valldemossí valldemossina
esporlerí esporlerina
santamarier santamariera
ciutadà ciutadana
arenaler arenalera
calvianer calvianera
andritxol andritxola
senceller sencellera
taujà taujana
bugerró bugerrona
indioter indiotera
fornalutxenc fornalutxenca
deianenc deianenca
conseller consellera
binialer binialera
biniamer biniamera
caimarienc caimarienca
moscarienc moscarienca
picaforter picafortera
establimenter establimentera
cabaneter cabanetera
marratxiner marratxinera
pladenateser pladenatesera
piner pinera
concarrí concarrina
capdellaner capdellanera
peguerí peguerina
pontdinquer pontdinquera
estellenquí estellenquina
banyalbufarí banyalbufarina
puigpunyentí puigpunyentina
arraconer arraconera
galileu galileva
rander randera
santjordier santjordiera
aranjasser aranjassera
ferrioler ferriolera
robertí robertina

ciutadellenc ciutadellenca
ferrerienc ferrerienca
alaiorenc alaiorenca
mercadalenc mercadalenca
maonès maonesa
castellà castellana
santclimenter santclimentera
santlluïser santlluïsera
forneller fornellera
migjorner migjornera
llucmaçanenc llucmaçanenca

eivissenc eivissenca
santantonienc santantonienca
mateuer mateuera
gertrudier gertrudiera
rafeler rafelera
coroner coronera
jordier jordiera
puigdenvaller puigdenvallera
eularier eulariera
josepí josepina
miqueler miquelera
formenterer formenterera
formenterenc formenterenca
agustiner agustinera

// Gentilicis de Catalunya
artesenc artesenca

